It's to be sort of the heartbeat of our discipline
in terms of terminology, the theory base, where
we've been. It's changed some with new
postmodernism and those kinds of issues, but it's
still basically the course. I started teaching
that, and I taught program evaluation, which is
now turned into the AEIS accountability system
for the state of Texas. We go online for that. And I
brought the futures class here. We had a planning
course, but not a futures class, so I initiated the
first futurism class on this campus in 1975. In
other words, the future of public, of education.
Well, it's called Planning Futurism, and it's in
the College of Education, but I'm offering it this
semester, and there's 20 students. We just closed
it. And they're from business, engineering,
agriculture. So it's an interdisciplinary
class. And Letha Malloy was in one of my early
classes, John Calhoun, we had on the committee,
and we did one of the first futures dissertation,
the first future dissertation on this campus,
where we interviewed the great higher education
stars who came in here for national conferences.
And she did a study on Delphi, where the
universities were going in the next 25 years. And
she wound up, as you know, being a vice president at
Southwest Texas State University. But John
Calhoun was on that committee. And I'll never
forget, the graduate dean at the time saw that
proposal and said, what is this futurism stuff?
What are these scenarios? And what are these
cross-impact matrices things? And we broke the
new paradigm. We created a new paradigm for new
kinds of studies because the graduate dean at the
time wasn't sure. And of course, having Calhoun on
the committee didn't hurt.
So these were all graduate courses. All graduate
courses. A normal teaching assignment then was
how many? It was two courses a semester. And you
wind up in a hurry with a great number of doctoral
students who have an interest that you have. And at
that time, the program wasn't as large as it is now,
but it was quite healthy. And I've always, since
I've been here within the first two years, have
either had somewhere between 15 and 30 students
I'm chairing on doctoral committees. Did, back to
advice, did anybody give you any do's and don'ts
advice?
You know, not really. Not really. It was just do
your thing. And Dr. Hensling, I guess, was the only
one that may have said when I would ask him things.
But I can't remember anybody saying, this is what
you do, this is what you don't do. They assumed you
knew that since I'd been a department head and been
teaching at other universities. But no, I'd say
that was a problem. Were there any differences
that you quickly noticed between TCU, Miami,
Tulsa, and A&M? I think the inflexibility that I
found here. There we had department chairs. There
was some rotation took place. There was more
liberal thinking about interdisciplinary kinds
of issues, even though at one time we'd had an
interdisciplinary education doctorate, but now
since it had become a department, it was pretty
much a turf kind of thing. It was more isolated than
I'd seen at Miami University. I'd been on the
faculty senates at Miami, and I was on the first
faculty senate at Texas A&M. Two of us were elected
from the College of Education in 1983. And I was
fortunate enough to be one of the first elected.
That was exciting, with John McDermott and all the
group trying to say, what's the core knowledge
going to be in our university? How are we going to
deal with such things as accrediting problems
when you're forcing students to take too much
liberal arts and humanities? How are we going to
become more decentralized and have more power by
faculty? rigid department structures that this
university has become accustomed to. We were able
to shatter and break a lot of that, and we were
really concerned about the kind of hold that the
department has had on the faculty. And that was a
meaningful three years to be on that first faculty
senate. Who were the key leaders that helped
produce that faculty senate? John McDermott got a
group of people together over his department, and
he was very instrumental in getting the group
together. Paul Parish was involved in that. I was
involved in it. David Erlandson here was involved
in it. I'm trying to think of some of the others. Old
Bill Barzak was very much involved and helpful.
I'm trying to think of a lady who's now deceased
that was in biochemistry.
She was very active in it. She was one of the first
really active women in the political side of the
university. But see. Were there any obstacles you
all had to overcome? No, because we had, you know,
the only obstacle we had, I guess, was just
tradition, because Rutter would not consider
having a faculty senate. Williams would have, but
it was just before its time. Well, here comes our
president from Rice University, who was very
open, very faculty-oriented, and
Frank was very interested in the future,
visioning, and didn't like committee meetings
too much. Now, this is true. He didn't like
committee meetings too much, but he was a great
faculty president. He really was
faculty-oriented, and I told him that every time I
saw him. And he helped us make this faculty senate
work. So I'll always admire that man a great deal.
And who was the chief academic officer at that
time? McDonald, let's see. Donald McDonald?
Yeah, Donald McDonald was one of the chief
academics. Because Prescott had already.
Prescott, see, is the one I was trying to mention a
while ago, who came here as provost in 76 or 77 and
said, I'll not promote any Aggies. Yes, Prescott
takes over and says that. That's right, that's
right. Do
you remember who the first faculty senate
chairman was? Yeah, it was John McDermott. John
McDermott. Yeah, speaker, yeah. And Bill Jenkins
and I were sergeant at arms. Bill later became, you
know, is now provost or president at LSU. And, oh,
yeah, he was a big, healthy guy, and I wasn't any
tiny guy. And so he'd stand up in his South African
accent and mine my Texas accent, and we'd say, all
right, settle down, guys. What did the deans think
about the coming of the Senate? They weren't
overwhelmed by it, but yet it was exciting because
they then saw, maybe with my exception, they then
saw who the leaders were on campus. Because the
faculty, the first elections, I think clearly the
faculty really became involved in it and elected
the people they thought could best represent them
in situations where they opposed the
administrative structure. And so we had some
pretty vocal people and some that weren't afraid
to speak out. And it was an exciting time, exciting
time. All right, let's jump back to your career.
How long did it take to get some doctoral students
for you? First semester, I probably picked up
three or four, some of McNamara's people. Letha
Malloy was one. He'd kind of started with her. I
picked up some of his students, three or four right
quick, and then I'd say within two years I had ten,
and then within five years it hadn't changed much
between eighteen and thirty, you know. Normally
how did, in those early years particularly,
normally how did you and a graduate student become
related? Well, through my classes many times, I'd
get to know students through classes, or contacts
I was beginning to make in the field, or through
some literature or something I had written.
Someone would get in touch with me, want to study
with me, those kinds of things. And I have had
students over the years that have come to study,
come to university to study with me, and that's
always been nice to have because immediately when
I got here, Harold Hawkins said, I want you to be my
backup for the administrative leadership
institute which used to be the old june conference
that's been going on here since the turn of the
century for county superintendents we used to
have a summer conference here well in 83 84 dr
hawkins and i with the advisory committee changed
that to meet at the hilton in the fall and it's in
november third week in november and i've been
running that by myself since 19 oh 86 i guess and uh
So that was something I picked up. It's a year-long
planning thing, but therefore it's helped me
become very visible with the Texas Association of
School Administrators and build the links. And we
have a new dean come in here, you know, like Dr. Jane
Conley. First weekend she was here, I took her to
the Texas Association of Texas School Board State
meeting, and I enjoyed introducing her to all the
power players, you know, in K-12 education. And
because our primary responsibility here,
whether people agree with me or not, is preparing
future leaders for Texas and American schools. We
prepare counselors, we do clinical psychology,
we do a lot of other things, but that's still our
primary thrust. We'll live and die with that. And
so, and I have her involved in ALI each year, and so
she's now, with her great skills, she's now very
much involved with the power players and
commissioners, and pretty soon in November I'll
have the commissioner here, and uh... key players
on issues like teachers supply and demand and
total systemic school change and uh... it's been
fun to be out on the front of that and i've got a
thirty person advisory board that helped me do
that now normally did a doctoral student contact
you personally about your being a chairman yeah
they'd contact me and say your interests are very
similar to mine i'd like for you to be my chair you
understand my problem being a superintendent
principal and i think that uh... where some of the
other professors hadn't had any experience in
public schools much, I had, and they'd come to me
because I had both a scholarship and a practice.
And most of them were already in the real world.
Yeah, most of them were in the real world.
Occasionally I'd have a young one like a David
Thompson or others who were tremendous scholars
who wanted to do research with me, and they had not
had much administrative experience, but they
wound up in higher ed. Those types wind up in higher
ed. I've got one right now, Clark Ely, who's just
been appointed Director of Planning, Research,
and Evaluation for the College Station Schools.
He'd been an assistant principal, but he got
involved with me and my research for about a year,
and he decided he wanted to be in higher ed rather
than public schools, so he's going to do that for a
while and then head toward university. Now, were
most of them then part-time students? Yeah, most
of them were part-time students. I usually have
one or two around here that are full-time that we
can get enough scholarship money for or
assistantship money for. And how many of them
would have a dissertation topic that would end up
being appropriate for them to do? And how many
would need your advice? Well, 90% of them need my
advice. Now, I've got a young woman here on campus
who's working with an agency. She came in here this
morning. And I've been talking with her for about a
year on research she's doing on campus for her job,
related to her job. And I said, hey, let's extend
that into your dissertation. So sometimes
they'll come in to me with an idea, but most of the
time, through our conversations, I'll help them
come up with an idea for a dissertation. Who were
some of the first students of which you're most
proud to claim? Well, I guess looking back on it,
Letha Malloy certainly was one that went toward
the direction of higher education. If I start
digging a little bit more, John Wilson, who's
superintendent of school down at Clear Creek,
just been honored by NASA. Just an outstanding
school leader. I think probably Cheryl Shake
Shaft was one of my students who wound up at Hofstra
as one of the leading spokeswomen for women in
administration. I can go on and on with that. David
Thompson's over at UT San Antonio. outstanding
scholar. Superintendent-wise, Harold Rahm,
superintendent of school at Belton, was one of
mine. Jim Boyle, superintendent of school at
Temple, is one of my students. Kenny Johnson,
superintendent over at Bremond. And I just don't
know how many principals I have out there, but
those are some of the people who've really
distinguished themselves both in scholarship
and How long would it take, since they would be
full-time employees, in the 70s, 80s, 90s, how
long did it take an average doctoral student to do
their degree? Three years. Oh, that's all? Three
years, because if they could come in here and spend
one year with me, they could get a lot of their
coursework done. And then their research would
take them about a year and a half to two years. If
they're EDD, which we started, as you know,
college started EDD in about 1976 or 7, for people
who could not come in regular residency but could
do it in the summer times, those people usually are
sometime around between three and four years
because they can come in the summers and take a lot
of work. And then they come and take weekend
courses. And now with TTVN, like I'll be teaching
in the fall, if they get a dissertation topic early
on, they have a record of study rather than
dissertation. The scholarship is just as
rigorous, but it's more of an action research as
opposed to a theoretical piece. Now, I'm assuming
that these students were not typical Aggie
students. They're really not. If you get a former
student to come in here, you don't have to really
worry about them understanding all the
traditions of A&M and those kinds of things. But I
spent a lot of my time in class say, hey, you're an
Aggie now. I don't care if you don't have your
undergraduate here. And I still remember your
line from a commencement address you made when you
said being part of the Long Maroon line. And I've
quoted that 1,000 times. I say, you're part of the
Long Maroon line by sitting in my chair in my
classroom. And I'm going to do all I can to help you
understand the traditions of this university. I
want you to feel close to it like I do. And if you just
come here as a student and not really become part of
the culture, you'll never really experience and
really know A&M like you need to know it. Man's
Silver Taps, I talk about that. Muster, I have them
go to Muster. And I have them try to, I've written
three books, you know, Good Bull, 30 Years of Aggie
Escapades that a bunch of them have read about some
of the antics. And so I enjoy doing that. And I like
to say, look, you're not mediocre anymore. You're
coming to Texas A&M to be a leader. And sometimes
maybe the GRE scores are not as high as they might be
at some other university, but you're here to learn
how to lead. We want you to be a leader in this
nation, not just a follower. And if you're going to
be in my class, I don't want you going out there
being a follower. And they believe me because I
mean it. What about sharing some Goodwill-type
experiences that relate to graduate students in
education? All right. There's one that I think is
just priceless. We had a student here who was
beautiful in English, a graduate student from
Lamar University, very naive guy, very bright.
There were three of us ran around together. We had
Dr. Lee Martin on our committee, for instance, Dr.
Hubert, several others, Dr. Barton Nelson. And
here was this really bright guy from Lamar that
would believe anything. You know, we'd short
sheet him and stuff like that. We'd go on research
trips, and we'd do it three times. He never caught
on. So Norval Northcutt, who wound up, he's
teaching UT now, statistics, mathematics, and so
on. We caught him early in his programs, And we
said, you've got to have complex variables,
mathematics 662, in order to get a doctorate here.
Well, they never told me that. Didn't you know
that? Norval, I don't understand that. How did you
do? Well, I made an A. I said, well, I made a B. But,
man, it was a tough course. But I knew I couldn't get
out here without it. Badgett said, my advisor said
I didn't have to take that. Oh, yes, you do too,
Johnny. You do too. We called the secretary of the
math department, Sherry Kovar. Her husband was a
football player at A&M. We said, we're sending
somebody up there now. We've already told him he's
got to have complex variables. You tell him when he
comes in there that he's got to have it. He's going
to come up with his degree plan. Well, we said,
Badgett? You've got to have it. He went crazy. He
goes running up his academic building. He goes
running up to the fourth floor, wherever
mathematics was, knocks on the door, goes in. Who
says I have to have mathematics? I barely passed
freshman algebra. How could I? He was going crazy.
If you don't believe me, you can go in and see our
department head. He said, yeah, I'll just see him.
Well, Norval and I had sneaked into the back of the
room. We go, we start laughing. He turns around.
I'm not going to tell you what he yelled at us. He had
on big old leather shoes. We had on tennis shoes.
We're running around the rotunda as fast as we can
run. He's yelling and screaming at us. We run down
the steps, and everybody on that fourth floor was
out wondering what was going on. So that, complex
variables. That's in, well, I wrote that up in Good
Bull, too, I think. Because, you know, graduate
students coming in don't believe anything the
other students say. You can scare them to death.
Now, the In the early years, the typical graduate
student was a native Texan. Yes. Male. Male. And
I'll tell you another interesting thing. The
first group of students who came in here in the
1960s, in the 1960s, we had an African-American
named Jim Johnson. The truth of the matter is there
was another Jim Johnson. They didn't know this Jim
Johnson was an African-American. He came in by
default. And got his PhD, went and retired from
Texas Southern University. But that was a mistake
at the time because there were no black students
here until 67, 68, basically. And he didn't have
any problems? No, he was great. Great. We'd slip up
and say the wrong things occasionally. And he'd
correct us. But I'll never forget that. By the time
you got here, There were women. Yes. Yes. Did you
have any impression of how, in the department and
in the college, how were the women and minorities
received in the 70s? Well, it was so unusual to see
them, except we had them coming in graduate
programs in the summers and those kinds of things.
They were certainly in the minority. And we had
Kamel Maghrabi, for instance, who's, I'm the
first American graduate from the PhD program in
education at Texas A&M. Wesley Summers was
second. He was former superintendent in Bryan.
But Kamel Maghrabi from Jordan was first, because
he'd already been here a year. And he transferred
most of his work to education. So we had quite a few
international students, because we had to take
French, Russian, or German. Then we had to have two
languages in the early PhD program. And so it
seemed to me that the acceptance of minorities
There wasn't any exclusion, but there was
certainly no effort to recruit minority students
that I can remember. Some of the women were
beginning to come into the programs who were
heading for principalships. Very little
emphasis on superintendency. Certainly some
emphasis on higher ed. We had some women go to
higher education early on out of our programs. But
no, there wasn't much effort to recruit anybody
but the white male. And Frank Hubert's role in
supporting the program?
I think without Frank Hoover, we wouldn't have had
the doctoral program, even though Dr. Hensling
did most of the legwork. He had his own set way of
thinking about what a doctor should be because he
was so influenced by his work in government and
education from the University of Texas.
Probably, he was probably, in my opinion, he
probably was not field-oriented enough. He was
probably not... as sensitive to the public
schools at the time, even though he was a power
player with the Coordinating Board and with the
State Board of Education, with J.W. Edgar and
those kind of people. It was really kind of the old
kingdom kind of deanship. It really was. Now, the
other major players at the doctoral level in
education administration in that era statewide
were whom? Well, Larry Haskew, University of
Texas. Very, very big name. I admired him a great
deal. He
was probably the major player. Then the schools
that had the big programs Yeah. UT Austin, who
else? UT Austin, University of Houston had
started their program. Texas Tech had a pretty big
program. And that was it. That was it. Baylor
didn't have theirs at the time. TCU did not have
one. SMU. Were you all deliberately trying to
pattern yourselves after anybody else? I think
so. The study I did pretty much said, here's what a
doctoral program looks like. So many hours,
languages, so much statistics, dissertation
quality, how many committees you got to have, how
long it takes. So yeah, I think the UT program
influenced us a lot. But the UT program is very
similar to the most good doctoral programs around
the nation in terms of your admission process,
what did you have on a GRE, and things like that.
After you got here, what was your first big
publication, your first big achievement?
Got here in 75.
Probably,
in terms of publications,
I had some things published in
the Phi Delta Kappa, which is well read, and I had a
piece published in the Education Administration
Quarterly, which is kind of our flagship. And then
my first book was in 1985, co-authored with Finn
McEnglish and Betty Steffi, which became sort of a
a landmark piece for Skills for Successful School
Leaders, which is now the Skills for 21st Century
School Leaders. We just published it again two
years ago, and it's become sort of a bestseller in
our field. A lot of articles for journals and
things like that during those early years. Do you
think those publications helped attract
students? Oh, there's no question about it. Now, I
presume you all didn't do much deliberate
recruitment. No, we did not. We did not. But I
started in having people who had read some of my
stuff encouraged their students to come to Texas
A&M. Now, in the college,
by the time we got to the mid-'70s, the department,
what were the other departments in the college?
They were curriculum instruction, educational
psychology, the department of, I guess what we
called industrial education that was very big,
you know, with Jim Boone and that bunch. Health and
physical education, now kinesiology. And that
was it. Who were the key people in those various
departments in the 70s? In the 70s, in EDCI, I
guess, Looking back on it, Glenn Johnson,
Bob Schutz,
key players who were very influential in what took
place. In industrial education, Jim Boone, James
Boone. I'm trying to think. Oh, he's retired now.
Oh, gosh, he did a lot of writing, a lot of work. I
can't think of his name. His wife teaches at Blinn
College, and he's an Aggie himself. Kinesiology,
of course, still Dr. Landis. Carl Landis. Carl
Landis was just a legend, one of the finest
scholars in kines or health and physical PE he'll
ever have. Tishler had retired by that time. Of
course, Coming in to that department, they had
Homer Tolson.
I'm trying to think, Dowell, a fellow named
Dowell, D-O-W-E-L-L. And
Charlie Shea was new. But that was pretty much it.
Y'all were the only one that was graduate only. We
were the only one graduate only. That's right. And
in terms of number of graduate students, y'all and
who else was big? EDCI? EDCI and us were the larger
programs. At that time, health and physical
education had a really good general degree for
people who wanted to teach physical education at
small colleges and universities. They were
pretty big at that time. When they went strictly
Kniece, more toward the scientific approach, and
cut that program out, they'd become much smaller.
Dean Hubert becomes chancellor in the late 70s.
Were y'all, were faculty members aware that that
was about to happen? Not at all, because we'd been
concerned about his health. And he'd gotten out
because he was just, you know, getting tired. And
the next thing I know, he was invited for a cup of
coffee. And I know that's because I'd talked with
him, invited for a cup of coffee. And he said, well,
I'd like you to be our chancellor. And I never shall
forget this one. You may or may not use this. Dr.
Miller was president. I'd been offered a
deanship. I go over to Dr. Miller, and I say,
Jarvis, is there any opportunity for me in terms of
the deanship at Texas A&M? It's the only deanship
I'd even consider. And I said, I realize when
you're a homeboy, sometimes your dirty laundry
and all those kinds of issues are there. But I said,
I've got a deanship offer here. And he turned to me
and he said, well, I don't know what my future is
here. He said, anytime you have a chancellor who's
counting paperclips and telling you exactly what
to do every day, I don't even know what my future is.
I'll never forget that. About when was this? That
was about two or three months after he'd become
chancellor, after Hubert had become chancellor.
Oh, okay. And the friction was already there. He
said, when I've got people coming and counting my
paperclips, I don't know what I'm going to do. And I
said, well, I've got a decision to make because I
went through anguish. Next thing I know, I'm on the
Athletic Council. Chuck Sampson, who was then
head of the Athletic Council, later was interim
president. Marvin Tate was athletic director.
And they appointed me to the Athletic Council. And
I was on that for eight years, along with Tom
Chandler. I mean, Tom Adair, some wonderful
people. And that was a year when the Athletic
Council really in my opinion, had a lot of
influence. And when Jackie Sherrill came in, the
friction started between me and him because I was
chairing a blue ribbon committee on eligibility
and those kinds of things. And then after he left,
then the whole tenor of the faculty senate, I mean
the athletic council started changing because
the faculty senate wanted to have their hand in it
because they thought maybe they're, the council
wasn't tough enough on the athletic program,
typical kind of thing, and I was off Dr. Boynton,
Dr., I forget who the president was at the time, I
guess it was Frank, appointed me, Vandiver,
appointed me to two terms, then I finished out
another term for somebody else, but it was a good
time. As far as you know, how did you get on the
council in the first place? I think Marvin Tate's
nominated me. I think Dr. Miller. He was already,
Marvin was already the AD? He was the AD, and I think
a conversation with Miller and him, and then Chuck
Sampson, who was chair of the council at the time,
agreed. So that Emory was already gone. He was
already gone. Tom Wilson was the coach. Tom Wilson
was the coach. When they fired Tom Wilson, Tom
tried to call me and said, John, don't let him do
this. uh... bill romaine who's recently passed
away uh... bill and i were pretty much couldn't
understand why we'd bring in a million dollar
coach and treat tom wilson the way the board of
regents had treated him the way uh... the
university treated tom wilson uh... i never have
appreciated that and i asked uh... the first day we
brought jackie sherrill in here we interviewed
him over in msc because we were hiding didn't want
anybody to see us because they didn't know he was on
campus they flew up and got him uh... in a lear jet
bill uh... who's on the Board of Regents, and Jim
Bond. Billy McKenzie.